
--- PAGE 1 ---
*: These authors contributed equally and shared first authorship. 
#: These authors contributed equally and shared senior authorship. 
Correspondence can be addressed to Xiamin Leng (xiamin_leng@berkeley.edu) or Alexander Fengler 
(alexander_fengler@brown.edu). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Perils of Omitting Omissions when Modeling Evidence Accumulation 
 
 
 
Xiamin Leng1*, Alexander Fengler2*, Amitai Shenhav1,3#, Michael J. Frank2,4# 
 
1. Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley 
2. Department of Cognitive and Psychological Sciences, Brown University 
3. Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley 
4. Carney Institute of Brain Science, Brown University 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 2 ---
1 
Abstract 
Response deadlines are commonly imposed in decision-making research to incentivize speedy decisions 
and sustained attention. This procedure frequently leads to a proportion of trials in which no response is 
made, and these omissions are often simply removed from the data during analysis. Here we show that 
this seemingly trivial assumption is in fact quite consequential for parameter estimation. We propose that 
omissions should instead be treated as observations to inform inference of the underlying generative 
process that led to their occurrence. Using new tools from likelihood-free inference applicable to a broad 
class of sequential sampling models (SSMs), we enable fast computation of omission probability without 
explicit integration, and clarify the degree to which omitting omissions – even in seemingly benign 
settings – can lead researchers astray. We explore this phenomenon in the setting of SSMs with constant 
and time-varying boundaries, and show that parameter recovery is improved by incorporating a model of 
omission probability. We show that the benefits of modeling omission probability are distinct from 
benefits gained from past approaches of modeling attentional lapses to account for these omissions. Our 
findings shine a light on the consequences of omitting omission in modeling choice behavior with SSMs, 
and demonstrate how joint modeling of observed and omitted data can improve parameter inference and 
therefore the reliability of downstream scientific conclusions. 
 
Keywords: likelihood-free; Bayesian inference; sequential sampling models; omissions 
 

--- PAGE 3 ---
2 
Introduction 
Joint modeling of choices and response times is a core methodological approach for unveiling the 
dynamics of decision making. An important class of cognitive process models used for this purpose is 
known as Sequential Sampling Models (SSM; Bogacz et al., 2006; Fengler et al., 2022; Forstmann et al., 
2016; Ratcliff, 1978). Variants of such SSMs are routinely used to dissect choice behavior into 
interpretable components. These models conceptualize decision making as boundary crossings of a 
random particle with drift. The momentary position of the particle represents a state of evidence of the 
system, and the momentary distance between choice boundaries represents the amount of accumulated 
evidence required to commit to a choice (or decision threshold). Crossing the boundary implies a choice 
and a corresponding response time on a given trial. Many studies have shown that this class of models 
provides a coherent account of choice proportions and their RT distributions across a range of paradigms 
whereby, for example, the drift rate is related to the strength of evidence in the signal (high rates lead to 
more accurate and faster RTs) and the boundary separation modulates the speed-accuracy tradeoff (higher 
bounds lead to slower but more accurate responding; Bogacz et al., 2006; Busemeyer et al., 2019). 
However, not every decision process ends in a boundary crossing, leaving open questions about how to 
treat trials without a recorded choice. 
 
Based on normative analyses, recent extensions of SSM models allow decision boundaries to collapse 
over time, such that the amount of evidence needed to commit to a choice is lower as time evolves 
(Tajima et al., 2016). This dynamic is believed to be especially beneficial for decision-making studies that 
involve a choice deadline: as the deadline approaches, the decision-maker should commit to the choice 
that has the most evidence even if they are not as confident about that choice as they would like to be 
given sufficient time (Drugowitsch et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2009). In addition to deadlines, boundary 
dynamics are also sensitive to properties of the choice options, such as those that lead to more difficult 
decisions (Malhotra et al., 2018) or otherwise generate decision conflict (Frank et al., 2015; Ging-Jehli et 
al., 2025; Herz et al., 2016, 2024; Kirschner et al., 2024). Such collapsing boundaries then serve as an 
“urgency-signal” for the subject to force a decision in service of a global objective function imposed by 
the experiment design (Frömer & Shenhav, 2022; Hawkins et al., 2015). Thus, estimating how decision 
parameters, including boundaries, vary according to cognitive and neural factors remains an active area of 
research that is informed by rigorous parameter estimation. 
 
In practice, while deadlines incentivize speedy decision-making, it is often inevitable to have trials for 
which no response is given (e.g., omissions). When analyzing such data, it is commonplace to exclude 
such omissions and focus only on the trials with committed responses (Blurton et al., 2023; Katsimpokis 

--- PAGE 4 ---
3 
et al., 2020; Noorbaloochi et al., 2015; Weindel et al., 2021). The implicit assumption has been that 
excluding these omitted trials will not significantly impact parameter estimation, and therefore 
downstream conclusions, but the extent to which this is the case typically goes untested. A more practical 
limitation has been that a majority of SSMs are only able to make predictions about committed responses, 
preventing studies from using these models to make inferences about omissions. While a few studies have 
attempted to estimate omission probabilities (Damaso et al., 2022; Hawkins & Heathcote, 2021), the 
available approaches can be computationally demanding. This challenge is especially important because it 
can discourage researchers from including omissions in their models at all. 
 
This paper addresses three questions: 1) What are the consequences of omitting omissions when inferring 
decision dynamics? 2) How to efficiently incorporate omissions into parameter estimation? 3) To what 
extent does including omission improve the identification of model parameters? Past studies (Damaso et 
al., 2022; Hawkins & Heathcote, 2021) estimated omission probabilities by integrating the post-deadline 
proportion of probability density function. However, these methods can be computationally expensive 
even for SSMs with analytic likelihood function, and this issue is especially pernicious for a broad class 
of SSMs that don’t have analytic likelihood functions. It would be beneficial to incorporate estimation of 
omission probability into sequential sampling models in an efficient way. The introduction of Likelihood 
Approximation Networks (LANs; Fengler et al., 2021, 2022) has enabled researchers to fit a broad class 
of such models by pretraining neural networks to approximate likelihood functions, comprising a form of 
amortized Bayesian inference (Radev et al., 2020, 2022). Building on this advancement, we extended the 
LAN framework to empirically investigate the vulnerability to misleading conclusions that arise when 
omissions are ignored. Rather than computing integrals analytically, we trained a second type of network, 
dubbed Omission Probability Network (OPN), directly on the omission probabilities, given SSM 
parameters and a deadline. We show with a series of numerical experiments that parameter estimation 
(and therefore conclusions about mechanisms driving cross-condition differences in behavior) can be 
severely affected if omissions are not explicitly modeled, even when such omissions are relatively rare. 
We then demonstrated that this limitation can be eliminated by joint modeling of observed data and 
omission using our LAN+OPN approach. We validate this conclusion with three different types of 
decision boundary (constant, linearly collapsing, and nonlinearly collapsing), and show that our model 
can distinguish between omissions arising from evidence accumulation and those arising from attentional 
lapses.  
 
 
 

--- PAGE 5 ---
4 
Methods 
Sequential sampling models  
In this paper, we begin with the drift diffusion model (DDM) as the basis from which we derive two 
additional variations as test-beds for our numerical experiments: the ANGLE and WEIBULL models. The 
DDM is a basic sequential sampling model (SSM), ubiquitously applied with a long history in cognitive 
science (Ratcliff, 1978). The standard DDM is formulated as  
𝑑𝑋𝑡= 𝑣𝑑𝑡+ 𝑐𝑑𝑊, 𝑋0 = 𝑧  
by setting 𝑓𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑
𝐷𝐷𝑀(𝑡) = 𝑎, a fixed boundary value, 𝑣 the drift rate, 𝑐𝑑𝑊 , a Gaussian noise scaling over 
time, and 𝑧, the bias at the starting point of the diffusion process. A decision is made when 𝑋𝑡 reaches 
lower (𝑎) or upper boundary (−𝑎). It is common to add a non-decision time 𝜏 to the model as a means to 
collect residual time spent on perceptual or motor processes not related to the choice process. Here, 
without loss of generality, we set 𝑧 at 0.5 (e.g., equal distance to upper and lower boundary) and 𝜏 at 0.3 
s. 
 
DDMs with collapsing bounds have been used in particular for situations with response deadlines (Frazier 
& Yu, 2007; Rapoport & Burkheimer, 1971), as a rational decision maker can force themselves to decide 
with incomplete evidence, especially if rational under a global objective function to maximize reward of 
an entire block of trials (Tajima et al., 2016). We will call a DDM with a linearly collapsing boundary the 
ANGLE model, and define the boundary as follows, 
𝑓𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑
𝐴𝑁𝐺𝐿𝐸(𝑡) = 𝑎−𝑡× 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜃)
𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜃) 
Here 𝜃 indicates the boundary collapsing angle with allowable range in the interval (0, 𝜋/2). The linearly 
collapsing boundary serves to represent the concept of urgency in decision making, which, as mentioned, 
has been proposed as theoretically relevant repeatedly. Our third alternative, which we call the WEIBULL 
model, takes as boundary shape the nonlinear Weibull function (Hawkins et al., 2015): 
𝑓𝑏𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑
𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑙(𝑡) = 𝑎× 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−(𝑡
𝛽)𝛼) 
where 𝛼 is the shape parameter and 𝛽 is the scale parameter.  
 
Our analysis in this paper will cover the DDM with all three types of boundary shape (constant, ANGLE, 
WEIBULL; Figure 1A). However, because the DDM with constant boundary is less suitable for 
responses with a time limit, we will primarily focus on the two models with collapsing bounds.  
 
 

--- PAGE 6 ---
5 
Likelihood 
When there is no response deadline, an SSM will eventually produce a response on each trial, and there 
will be no omissions. The likelihoods for observed responses based on SSMs with two alternatives are 
described by a set of two defective distributions (one for each choices, 𝑐= 1 and 𝑐= −1), 𝑓𝑐(𝑡; 𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀), 
where, 
∫
𝑓1(𝑡|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀)𝑑𝑡
+∞
0
+ ∫
𝑓−1(𝑡|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀)𝑑𝑡
+∞
0
= 1 
and 𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀 represents the set of parameters for our given SSM. However, when a response deadline 𝑑exist, 
only responses before the deadline will be observed, and the rest of trials will be treated as omissions. 
Here we are specifically interested in the influence of inclusion and exclusion of omissions on parameter 
recovery, and thus two types of data need to be considered in the model. 
 
1. Observed data 𝐷: 𝑑𝑖= (𝑟𝑡𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) where 𝑟𝑡𝑖≤𝑑 and both RT and choice are recorded. 
2. Omission 𝑂: 𝑑𝑖= (𝑟𝑡𝑖, 𝑐𝑖) where 𝑟𝑡𝑖> 𝑑 and neither RT or choice is recorded. Instead, the trial is 
masked with a boolean value indicating omission. 
 
For observed data points we use our functions 𝑓𝑐(𝑡; 𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀) above. For omissions, however, we need to 
compute the following integral, 
𝑝(𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀) = ∫
𝑓1(𝑡|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀)𝑑𝑡
+∞
𝑑
+ ∫
𝑓−1(𝑡|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀)𝑑𝑡
+∞
𝑑
 
In this integral, 𝑑 indicates the response deadline imposed by experiment and is treated as a known 
parameter. Since these integrals are not typically considered or available in relevant software packages for 
SSM parameter estimation researchers choose to treat omissions as missing data, and thus perform 
inference using only the probability density functions for observed data described above. In this paper, we 
used 1.25 s as the deadline, but the general pattern persists with different deadline settings when omission 
rate is similar. 
 
Here we address this problem by extending the framework of likelihood approximation networks (LAN; 
Fengler et al., 2021), to enable fast inference of arbitrary SSMs while including the likelihood of 
omissions explicitly. To be consistent across our analyses and without loss of generality, we use the LAN 
as the likelihood for all observed responses from SSMs, even though analytical likelihoods are available 
for the standard DDM case. We previously showed that the LAN provides an excellent approximation of 
the DDM likelihood and can even be more efficient in computation time than the analytical likelihood, 
because it can be parallelized over trials. Thus, all of our comparisons to the “LAN only” approach would 

--- PAGE 7 ---
6 
apply equally for analytic likelihoods; the main results of this paper should thus be taken to showcase the 
utility of OPNs, not to judge the adequacy or inadequacy of LANs per se. In particular, we use a 
simulator that returns the probability of missing the deadline, which can then be used to train an OPN to 
estimate this probability based on SSM parameters and response deadline. Hence, we train two LANs for 
each model, one for the function 𝑓𝑐𝐿𝐴𝑁(𝑡|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀) that will, and one for the function 𝑓𝑂𝑃𝑁(𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀). 
The log-likelihood of a given dataset (𝐷, 𝑂), is then computed as, 
𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑙(𝐷, 𝑂|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀, 𝑑) = ∑𝑓𝑐𝑖
𝐿𝐴𝑁(𝑟𝑡𝑖|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀)
|𝐷|
𝑖=0
+ |𝑂| × 𝑓𝑂𝑃𝑁(𝑜𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛|𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀,𝑑) 
this combined approach enables estimation of 𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀 via fitting observed choice data and omissions jointly 
(Figure 1B). 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of the log-likelihood formulation with the help of a LAN and 
an OPN. A) We consider drift diffusion model (DDM), a representative sequential 
sampling model (SSM), with constant, linearly collapsing, and nonlinearly collapsing 
boundary shapes. B) In our proposed framework, the OPN provides a function 𝑓𝑂𝑃𝑁for 
the log-likelihood of omissions, given a deadline setting. We simply multiply the log-
likelihood of omissions by the number of omitted trials, which is enough for the 
numerical experiments introduced here. In principle, trial-wise deadlines can be 
incorporated at no extra cost. The LAN provides the function 𝑓𝐿𝐴𝑁for the log-likelihood 
of observing a given (𝑟𝑡, 𝑐) response time and choice pair prior to the deadline. Both 
networks take 𝜃𝑆𝑆𝑀-the parameters of the underlying sequential sampling model. The 
LANs input adds to this the observed pair (𝑟𝑡, 𝑐), while the OPN adds to this the deadline 
𝑑. The general framework is applicable to a large class of sequential sampling models 
(A), of which the model shown here is simply a concrete example based on ANGLE 
model (B). 

--- PAGE 8 ---
7 
Inclusion of lapse distribution 
While our primary analysis assumes that all choices are generated from a single SSM parameterization, 
empirically, it is also possible that some proportion of responses and omissions reflect attentional lapses. 
To test how our approach performs in this case, we modeled a lapse distribution as a uniform distribution 
over a wide range of time 𝑇 (5s in our analysis) and assuming that lapses generate random choices (in this 
case, p=0.5 for each choice option): 
𝑓𝐿𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒(𝑡) =
1
2 × 𝑇 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑡∈[0, 𝑇] 
In this case, omissions from the lapse distribution simply means a sample with 𝑟𝑡> 𝑑 drawn from lapse 
distribution.  
 
With this setting of lapse distribution, both observed data and omissions are drawn from a mixed 
distribution of SSM and lapse. The proportion of lapse is quantified as 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒 and thus the weight of SSM 
is 1 −𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒. The joint likelihood of observed data and omission is 
𝑙𝑖𝑘𝑒𝑙𝑖ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑑= (1 −𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒) × 𝑙𝑖𝑘𝑒𝑙𝑖ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑆𝑆𝑀+ 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒× 𝑓𝐿𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒 
where 𝑙𝑖𝑘𝑒𝑙𝑖ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑑𝑆𝑆𝑀 is based on Equation (6). This likelihood enables joint estimation of SSM 
parameters as well as the lapse proportion, whether considering omission or not. 
 
Results 
Influence of omitting omissions for DDM with constant boundary 
A DDM with a constant decision boundary—where evidence accumulates over time until it reaches a 
fixed threshold—typically predicts response time (RT) distributions with a long tail, meaning that a non-
negligible portion of responses would occur only after very long delays. Therefore, it also predicts that a 
considerable fraction of these expected responses will be omitted under a realistic response deadline. 
Without compensation for these omissions, constant-boundary DDMs that are fit to the remainder of the 
data will estimate the threshold 𝑎 as being lower than it actually is (Figure 1A). Moreover, fitting with 
only a LAN (in this case, equivalent to fitting the analytical likelihood function for the DDM but ignoring 
omissions) also overestimates drift rate 𝑣 and recovers larger than accurate bias parameters for higher 
omission rates (Figure 1B). These misestimations arise because the model cannot penalize omissions 
through the likelihood term and therefore prioritizes parameters supported by faster responses (e.g., lower 
threshold and higher drift rate). In contrast, when we jointly model observed choices and omission with 
the LAN+OPN approach, we obtained reliable parameter recovery for various combinations of (𝑎, 𝑣) 
with different levels of omission rate (Figure 1C-D). 

--- PAGE 9 ---
8 
 
Figure 2. Parameter recovery performance for DDM model with constant threshold, 
when either ignoring omissions (e.g., only considering likelihood of responses before 
deadline; LAN-only model; A-B) or including them via the omission probability network 
as explained in Figure 1 (e.g., including integral of post-deadline likelihood; LAN+OPN 
model; C-D). When omission exists, the LAN-only approach underestimates response 
threshold a (A) and overestimates drift rate v (B). With the LAN+OPN approach, both 
threshold a (C) and drift rate v (D) are properly recovered. Error bars refer to 95% 
confidence intervals of mean posteriors across multiple synthetic data sets from the same 
parameter configuration. Gray lines represent identity lines. 
 
Influence of omitting omission for DDM with linearly collapsing boundary 
While we have confirmed that the existence of omissions can bias parameter estimation when a model 
ignores omissions, as noted above, the constant bound DDM may not be the ideal model with response 
deadline, as it does not take urgency into consideration (Frazier & Yu, 2007; Yu et al., 2009). A DDM 
with a collapsing boundary may therefore be less vulnerable to the existence of omissions because it 
better captures distributions of responses under time pressure (e.g., shorter reaction time responses). We 
begin by examining a version of the collapsing boundary model that collapses linearly, using the ANGLE 
model which we have previously shown can be efficiently estimated with a LAN (Fengler et al., 2021). 
Here we primarily focused on the recovery of boundary parameters (𝑎, 𝜃). When there is no omission in 
the simulated data, the LAN-only model adequately recovers r the boundary parameters (blue dots in 
Figure 3). But when omissions exist in the data (reddish dots in Figure 3), recovered values of 𝑎 and 𝜃 are 
overestimated when only a LAN is used. Specifically, when omission is not considered, the LAN-only 

--- PAGE 10 ---
9 
model inferred more aggressive collapsing boundary than the generative process, with 𝑎 overestimated 
especially when true 𝑎 is high and 𝜃 overestimated when true 𝜃 is low (Figure 3A and 3B), as this leads 
to minimal omission probability. While the bias increases as omission rate increases (e.g., more missing 
data), it is worth noting that significant bias emerges even when omission rates are lower than 5%. In 
contrast, using the LAN+OPN approach, we obtained reliable parameter recovery for various 
combinations of (𝑎, 𝜃) and different levels of omission rate (Figure 3C-D), as the inclusion of omissions 
informs the model of the fact that the actual response boundary does not collapse fast enough to eliminate 
omissions. 
 
 
Figure 3. Parameter recovery performance for DDM model with linearly collapsing 
boundary, with either the LAN-only approach (A-B) or the LAN+OPN approach (C-D). 
When omission exists, LAN-only model overestimates both initial response threshold a 
(A) and angle of collapsing boundary 𝜃 (B). With the LAN+OPN-based approach, both 
initial threshold a (C) and angle of collapsing boundary 𝜃 (D) are properly recovered. 
Error bars refer to 95% confidence interval of mean posteriors across multiple synthetic 
data sets from the same parameter configuration. Gray lines represent identity lines. 
Black lines indicate same true theta value in A and C, and same true a value in B and D. 
 
Modeling omissions better estimates experimental condition effects on decision boundary: a synthetic 
demonstration 
In addition to the overestimation bias, we also sought to assess how taking omissions into account 
impacts a typical experimental setting in which one may test whether a model parameter varies by 

--- PAGE 11 ---
10 
experimental condition. In this case, we simulate conditions in which 𝜃 differs across two experimental 
conditions (e.g., speed vs accuracy emphasis) but the analysis yields similar results with regard to the 
remaining model boundary parameters; Figure 4A). In a synthetic two-condition experiment, we found 
that the LAN-only approach underestimates the difference in 𝜃 between the two conditions (true 𝛥𝜃=
0.2; dashed line in Figure 4B). However, the LAN+OPN approach correctly recovers this difference 
between conditions (Figure 4B). This improved recovery of experimental condition on 𝜃 held across 
several combinations of the other model parameters drift rate and threshold that were tested (Figure 4B). 
Beyond parameter recovery, posterior predictive checks also confirmed that the LAN-only model fails to 
capture the true omission rate of each condition (Figure 4C) while including the OPN resolves this 
discrepancy. 
 
Figure 4. Estimation of change in boundary collapse in synthetic experiments. (A) 
Settings of synthetic experiments. Data is simulated from two conditions, with 𝜃 values 
of 0.9 and 0.7 respectively (true 𝛥𝜃= 0.2), for a variety of settings of drift rate (v) and 
initial threshold (a) parameters. (B) Recovery of collapse difference. While properly 
accounting for omissions correctly recovers 𝛥𝜃, the parameter difference, ignoring 
omissions, severely underestimates it across conditions. Error bars indicate 95% 
confidence interval of posterior distribution. (C) Prediction of omission rate. 
Correspondingly, omission rates in posterior predictive distributions are wrongly 
calibrated if omissions are not appropriately accounted for during the inference stage. 
Models fit without omissions systematically predict much lower overall omission rates 
and smaller variance in omission rates. 
 
 
 

--- PAGE 12 ---
11 
Identifying model parameters and lapse rate jointly 
While the direct cause of omissions in our simulations so far is the response deadline, the underlying 
process leading to that omission could be multiply determined. We have assumed that omissions are due to 
not having hit the bound, but it is also possible that in empirical data, they reflect a lapse in attention and thus a 
different generative process in some proportion of trials. In empirical data analysis, researchers often include 
a lapse distribution (typically formulated as a uniform distribution of responses; Ratcliff & Tuerlinckx, 
2002) to adjust the likelihood of outlier data points. Under a lapse distribution, omissions can result 
simply from sampling parts of the distribution with reaction times longer than the deadline. We have so 
far shown that, in the absence of explicit lapses, our model can effectively eliminate the omission-related 
bias in parameter recovery. However, when lapses are present, it is unclear whether our model can 
correctly attribute omissions to these lapses versus to the evidence accumulation process (Damaso et al., 
2022).  
 
To address this question, we generated data jointly from SSM and a lapse distribution with a uniform 
probabilistic density function over a wide range of reaction time (Figure 5A). The proportion of data from 
the lapse distribution is indexed as 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒. For both the LAN-only method and the LAN+OPN approach, 
we characterized the distribution of observed data (and omissions for LAN+OPN) as a mixture of SSM 
and the lapse distribution, which allows us to estimate both parameters of the SSM and 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒. We tested 
the performance of parameter recovery with low (0.01) and high (0.05) values of 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒. Consistent with 
our previous results, our LAN+OPN approach properly recovered the parameters (𝑎, 𝜃) for both levels of 
𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒, while, as expected, a model without the inclusion of omission cannot recover the parameters 
(Figure 5BD). Importantly, we found that the LAN+OPN method not only recovered the parameters from 
SSM, but also provides accurate inference of the ratio of the lapse distribution, while a LAN-only 
approach significantly underestimated 𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑝𝑠𝑒, since a large proportion of the lapse distribution is 
represented as omissions and ignored (Figure 5CE). 

--- PAGE 13 ---
12 
 
 

--- PAGE 14 ---
13 
Figure 5. Parameter recovery when including lapse. (A) The model, whether 
considering omission or not, combines observed data (and omissions) generated from 
SSM and lapse process with a uniform distribution over rt and equal probability for 
choices. With a low lapse rate (p=0.01; B-C), the LAN+OPN approach can properly 
recover both boundary parameters, while the LAN-only approach cannot (B). Illustrates 
the same phenomenon for the low lapse rate (C). This is confirmed with a higher lapse 
rate (p=0.05; D-E). Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals across mean posteriors. 
Gray lines represent identity lines. 
 
Extension to DDM with nonlinearly collapsing boundary 
We have considered our approach for DDMs with either a constant or a linearly collapsing boundary. Past 
research suggests that the urgency process may not be constant over time, such that the boundary 
collapses nonlinearly. A typical formulation of this type of boundary shape is based on a Weibull 
cumulative distribution function (Figure 6; Hawkins et al., 2015). Since a nonlinearly collapsing 
boundary may better capture the dynamics of the urgency process, it is possible that such a model may be 
less vulnerable to omissions. We therefore sought to extend our approach to DDMs with a Weibull 
boundary, and test to what extent our model can improve parameter recovery under these conditions. 
 
As suggested in past efforts of parameter recovery, it is difficult to recover the parameters of the Weibull 
boundary (Fengler et al., 2021) unless the task includes multiple experimental conditions to help constrain 
parameter estimates (Ging-Jehli et al., 2025), but the recovery of the overall boundary shape works much 
better. We first looked at the recovery of the Weibull boundary with the LAN-only approach (Figure 6A). 
Similar to the results of ANGLE model, the LAN-Only estimated boundary model collapses more steeply 
than true parameters in the generative process and with less variability at later time points, because the 
model does not consider the likelihood of omissions and is biased by observed RTs. When looking at the 
individual boundary parameters, the LAN-only model underestimated the initial boundary a (Figure 6B), 
overestimated the shape parameter 𝛼 (Figure 6C), and underestimated the scale parameter 𝛽 (Figure 6D). 
More importantly, regardless of the true scale parameter, the LAN-only approach always generated a 
similar qualitative estimation of the overall boundary shape (Figure 6D). This is consistent with the fact 
that the LAN-only model excludes variability in responding after the deadline (i.e., the omissions). 
 
In contrast, with the LAN+OPN approach, the boundary shape was better recovered (Figure 6E). While 
the true parameters were still not perfectly recovered, which is a known identifiability limitation for this 
model when only a single experimental condition exists in the data (Fengler et al., 2021), the LAN+OPN 
approach considerably improved parameter estimation bias relative to the LAN-Only approach. More 
specifically, LAN+OPN model reduced the bias in the initial boundary and shape parameter (Figure 6E-
F) and better captured variability in the scale parameter (Figure 6G).  

--- PAGE 15 ---
14 
 
Figure 6. Parameter recovery performance for DDM model with a nonlinearly 
collapsing boundary. The boundary shape is characterized as a Weibull cdf function 
with initial threshold a, shape parameter 𝛼, and scale parameter 𝛽. Without considering 
omissions, a LAN-only approach failed to properly recover the boundary, with estimated 
boundaries collapsing down to nearly 0 much earlier than the true boundary (A). 
Correspondingly, the model tends to underestimate initial threshold a (B), overestimate 
shape parameter 𝛼 (C), and fail to capture most of the variance in scale parameter 𝛽 (D). 
The LAN+OPN approach recovers the true boundary much better (E), with the recovery 
of all three boundary parameters improved (F-H). Error bars indicate 95% confidence 
intervals of the mean posterior. Gray lines represent identity lines. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
15 
 
Enabling the use of OPNs for the Scientific Community: HSSM 
While we have thus far demonstrated the utility of OPNs for reducing bias in parameter estimation in 
custom code base, we also wanted to make the tool more readily usable for arbitrary modeling studies. 
We thus refined the implementation of the LAN+OPN approach for deployment in the Hierarchical 
Sequential Sampling Model (HSSM) python toolbox which enables hierarchical Bayesian estimation for 
a wide class of cognitive process models (Fengler, A., et al., in prep). While the default setting in HSSM 
(Figure 7A) is to only include observed data in the inference and thus omissions (as well as the deadline 
information) will be ignored, we modified the toolbox to allow it to incorporate omissions via 
LAN+OPN. As a simple proof of concept, we reproduce the findings reported above: when omissions 
exist in the data, the default setting can lead to bias in the posterior distribution (Figure 7B). HSSM can 
incorporate the OPN with a simple configuration change (Figure 7C). Compared to the default settings, 
accounting for omission with OPN can improve the posterior distribution with better alignment with the 
true parameters (Figure 7D). This proof of concept using the ANGLE model can be easily extended in 
HSSM, where users can add additional LANs and corresponding OPNs for any arbitrary SSM. 
 
 
